Add example for migrating a Python package from ROS 1 to 2 (#4780)
ros2/ros2_documentation: source/How-To-Guides/Migrating-from-ROS1/Migrating-Python-Package-Example.rst

Migrating a Python Package Example
==================================

This guide shows how to migrate an example Python package from ROS 1 to ROS 2.

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :depth: 2
   :local:

> Prerequisites

Reviewer: I just did a first pass read on this while I had a minute. 

One suggestion, which you are free to ignore, is that if you wrote an index / overview for this document it would effectively be a check list that readers could work through systematically. 

We can certainly come back to this once the initial PR is complete and add it in.

Author: I will skip this one for now to conserve time

-------------

You need a working ROS 2 installation, such as :doc:`ROS {DISTRO} <../../Installation>`.

The ROS 1 code
--------------

> Create a colcon workspace at ``~/ros2_tallker_py``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create a colcon workspace at ``~/ros2_talker_py``.
```

But actually, it is kind of odd to say that this is ROS 1 code, but we are also creating a `colcon` workspace.  I know that this combination works, but it isn't "usual" for ROS 1.  Also, we are creating a ROS 1 package without having ROS 1 installed; that's OK for the purposes of this example, but it is also a little confusing.

The combination of all of this suggests to me that we should explain more of this in the heading here.  Maybe something like:

```
We are going to create an example ROS 1 Python package, and then in further steps we'll convert that package to ROS 2.
It is not necessary to have ROS 1 installed for this, as we won't be running the ROS 1 code.

We start by creating a workspace for the code to live in:
```

Reviewer: Also, shouldn't it be *C*olcon?

Author: Gave a reason for the Colcon workspace and capitalized Colcon in 3704f9b4

.. code-block:: bash

>     mkdir -p ~/ros2_talker_py/src

Reviewer 2: This instruction is Linux-specific (or at least Unix-specific).  I'm going to suggest adding tabs for Windows as well; I think there should be examples throughout the documentation already for each of the commands you want to do here.

The same goes for all `.. code-block` below.

Author: Added tabs for Windows in f6f66022

    )

Delete the call to ``generate_distutils_setup()``.

.. code-block::

    # Delete this
    setup_args = generate_distutils_setup(
        packages=['talker_py'],
        package_dir={'': 'src'}
    )

The call to ``setup()`` needs some `additional metadata <https://docs.python.org/3.11/distutils/setupscript.html#additional-meta-data>`__ copied from the ``package.xml``:

* package name via the ``name`` argument
* package version via the ``version`` argument
* maintainer via the ``maintainer`` and ``maintainer_email`` arguments
* description via the ``description`` argument
* license via the ``license`` argument

The package name will be used multiple times.
Create a variable called ``package_name`` above the call to ``setup()``.

.. code-block:: Python

    package_name = 'talker_py'

Copy all of the remaining information into the arguments of ``setup()`` in ``setup.py``.
Your call to ``setup()`` should look like this:

.. code-block:: Python

    setup(
        name=package_name,
        version='1.0.0',
        install_requires=['setuptools'],
        zip_safe=True,
        packages=['talker_py'],
        package_dir={'': 'src'},
        maintainer='Brian Gerkey',

>         maintainer_email='gerkey@osrfoundation.org',

Reviewer: RIP Brian's e-mail.

Author: Using `example.com` email in bdb3cdc6

        description='The talker_py package',
        license='BSD',
    )

ROS 2 packages must install two data files so that command line tools like ``ros2 run`` can find them:

* a ``package.xml``
* a package marker file

> Your package already has a ``package.xml``, but it does not yet have a package marker file.

Reviewer: A short description of what package marker files do might be helpful here. It is unclear to me why we are doing this.

Author: f33240c9 explains what the package marker file does

Create the marker file by creating a directory next to the ``package.xml`` called ``resource``.
Create an empty file in that directory with the same name as the package.

.. code-block:: bash

    mkdir resource
    touch resource/talker_py

The ``setup()`` call in ``setup.py`` must tell ``setuptools`` how to install these files.
Add the following ``data_files`` argument to the call to ``setup()``.

.. code-block:: Python

    data_files=[
        ('share/ament_index/resource_index/packages',
            ['resource/' + package_name]),
        ('share/' + package_name, ['package.xml']),
    ],

Your ``setup.py`` is almost complete.

Migrate Python scripts and create ``setup.cfg``
-----------------------------------------------

ROS 2 Python packages uses ``console_scripts`` `entry points <https://python-packaging.readthedocs.io/en/latest/command-line-scripts.html#the-console-scripts-entry-point>`__ to install Python scripts as executables.
The `configuration file <https://setuptools.pypa.io/en/latest/userguide/declarative_config.html>`__ ``setup.cfg`` tells ``setuptools`` to install those executables in a package specific directory so that tools like ``ros2 run`` can find them.

> Create a ``setup.cfg`` file next to the ``package.xml``.
> 
> .. code-block:: bash
> 
>     touch setup.cfg
> 
> Put the following content into it:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add the following content to a new file called ``setup.cfg`` file next to the ``package.xml``:
```

(just to keep in OS-agnostic)

Author: Ended up adding tabs for all platforms in f6f66022

.. code-block::

    [develop]
    script_dir=$base/lib/talker_py
    [install]
    install_scripts=$base/lib/talker_py

> You still need to define the executables to be installed.
> Use the ``console_scripts`` entry point to do this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You'll need to use the ``console_scripts`` entry point to define the executables to be installed.
```

Each entry has the format ``executable_name = some.module:function``.
The first part specifies the name of the executable to create.
The second part specifies the function that should be run when the executable starts.
This package needs to create an executable called ``talker_py_node``, and the executable needs to call the function ``main`` in the ``talker_py`` module.
Add the following entry point specification as another argument to ``setup()`` in your ``setup.py``.

.. code-block:: Python

    entry_points={
        'console_scripts': [
            'talker_py_node = talker_py:main',
        ],
    },

The ``talker_py_node`` file is no longer necessary.
Delete the file ``talker_py_node`` and delete the ``scripts/`` directory.

.. code-block:: bash

    rm scripts/talker_py_node
    rmdir scripts

> This is the last change to your ``setup.py``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The addition of ``console_scripts`` is the last change to your ``setup.py``.
```

* Create a class that inherits from ``Node``.
* Do all work in callbacks, and never block those callbacks.

For example, create a ``Talker`` class that inherits from ``Node``.
As for doing work in callbacks, use a ``Timer`` with a callback instead of ``rate.sleep()``.
Make the timer callback publish the message and return.
Make ``main()`` create a ``Talker`` instance rather than using ``rclpy.create_node()``, and give the executor the main thread to execute in.

Your refactored code might look like this:

.. code-block:: Python

    import threading

    import rclpy
    from rclpy.node import Node
    from rclpy.executors import ExternalShutdownException
    from std_msgs.msg import String

    class Talker(Node):

        def __init__(self, **kwargs):
            super().__init__('talker', **kwargs)

            self._pub = self.create_publisher(String, 'chatter', 10)
            self._timer = self.create_timer(1 / 10, self.do_publish)

        def do_publish(self):
            hello_str = String()
            hello_str.data = f'hello world {self.get_clock().now()}'
            self.get_logger().info(hello_str.data)
            self._pub.publish(hello_str)

    def main():

>         rclpy.init()

Reviewer 2: For the `rolling` branch only, I'm going to suggest that we switch to the `with rclpy.init():` context manager, since we have switched all of our other examples to that.  But do note that when we backport this to other distributions, we are going to have to go back to the "regular" `rclpy.init()`.

Author: Added in a separate PR https://github.com/ros2/ros2_documentation/pull/4813. My thinking is we can merge this one, backport-all, and then merge #4813 just to `rolling`.

Always start by migrating your ``package.xml``.

First, ROS 2 does not use ``catkin``.
Delete the ``<buildtool_depend>`` on it.

.. code-block::

    <!-- delete this -->
    <buildtool_depend>catkin</buildtool_depend>

Next, ROS 2 uses ``rclpy`` instead of ``rospy``.
Delete the dependency on ``rospy``.

.. code-block::

    <!-- Delete this -->
    <depend>rospy</depend>

Replace it with a new dependency on ``rclpy``.

.. code-block:: xml

    <depend>rclpy</depend>

Add an ``<export>`` section to tell ROS 2's build tool `Colcon <https://colcon.readthedocs.io/>`__ that this is an ``ament_python`` package instead of a ``catkin`` package.

.. code-block:: xml

     <export>
       <build_type>ament_python</build_type>
     </export>

Your ``package.xml`` is fully migrated.
It should now look like this:

.. code-block:: xml

    <?xml version="1.0"?>
    <?xml-model href="http://download.ros.org/schema/package_format2.xsd" schematypens="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema"?>
    <package format="2">
        <name>talker_py</name>
        <version>1.0.0</version>
        <description>The talker_py package</description>

>         <maintainer email="gerkey@osrfoundation.org">Brian Gerkey</maintainer>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        <maintainer email="gerkey@example.com">Brian Gerkey</maintainer>
```

    )

Delete the call to ``generate_distutils_setup()``.

.. code-block::

    # Delete this
    setup_args = generate_distutils_setup(
        packages=['talker_py'],
        package_dir={'': 'src'}
    )

The call to ``setup()`` needs some `additional metadata <https://docs.python.org/3.11/distutils/setupscript.html#additional-meta-data>`__ copied from the ``package.xml``:

* package name via the ``name`` argument
* package version via the ``version`` argument
* maintainer via the ``maintainer`` and ``maintainer_email`` arguments
* description via the ``description`` argument
* license via the ``license`` argument

The package name will be used multiple times.
Create a variable called ``package_name`` above the call to ``setup()``.

.. code-block:: Python

    package_name = 'talker_py'

Copy all of the remaining information into the arguments of ``setup()`` in ``setup.py``.
Your call to ``setup()`` should look like this:

.. code-block:: Python

    setup(
        name=package_name,
        version='1.0.0',
        install_requires=['setuptools'],
        zip_safe=True,
        packages=['talker_py'],
        package_dir={'': 'src'},
        maintainer='Brian Gerkey',

>         maintainer_email='gerkey@osrfoundation.org',

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        maintainer_email='gerkey@example.com',
```

        'console_scripts': [
            'talker_py_node = talker_py:main',
        ],
    },

The ``talker_py_node`` file is no longer necessary.
Delete the file ``talker_py_node`` and delete the ``scripts/`` directory.

.. tabs::

  .. group-tab:: Linux

    .. code-block:: bash

        rm scripts/talker_py_node
        rmdir scripts

  .. group-tab:: macOS

    .. code-block:: bash

        rm scripts/talker_py_node
        rmdir scripts

  .. group-tab:: Windows

    .. code-block:: bash

        del scripts/talker_py_node
        rd scripts

The addition of ``console_scripts`` is the last change to your ``setup.py``.
Your final ``setup.py`` should look like this:

.. code-block:: Python

    from setuptools import setup

    package_name = 'talker_py'

    setup(
        name=package_name,
        version='1.0.0',
        packages=['talker_py'],
        package_dir={'': 'src'},
        install_requires=['setuptools'],
        zip_safe=True,
        data_files=[
            ('share/ament_index/resource_index/packages',
                ['resource/' + package_name]),
            ('share/' + package_name, ['package.xml']),
        ],
        maintainer='Brian Gerkey',

>         maintainer_email='gerkey@osrfoundation.org',

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        maintainer_email='gerkey@example.com',
```

Build the workspace in the first terminal.

.. tabs::

  .. group-tab:: Linux

    .. code-block:: bash

        cd ~/ros2_talker_py
        . /opt/ros/{DISTRO}/setup.bash
        colcon build

  .. group-tab:: macOS

    .. code-block:: bash

        cd ~/ros2_talker_py
        . /opt/ros/{DISTRO}/setup.bash
        colcon build

  .. group-tab:: Windows

    .. code-block:: bash

        cd \ros2_talker_py
        call C:\dev\ros2\local_setup.bat
        colcon build

Source your workspace in the second terminal, and run the ``talker_py_node``.

.. tabs::

  .. group-tab:: Linux

    .. code-block:: bash

        cd ~/ros2_talker_py
        . install/setup.bash
        ros2 run talker_py talker_py_node

  .. group-tab:: macOS

    .. code-block:: bash

        cd ~/ros2_talker_py
        . install/setup.bash
        ros2 run talker_py talker_py_node

  .. group-tab:: Windows

    .. code-block:: bash

        cd \ros2_talker_py
        call install\setup.bat
        ros2 run talker_py talker_py_node

Echo the message published by the node in the third terminal:

.. tabs::

  .. group-tab:: Linux

    .. code-block:: bash

        . /opt/ros/{DISTRO}/setup.bash

>         ros2 run talker_py talker_py_node

Reviewer 2: I think this should be `ros2 topic echo /chatter`, or something like that, right?  Same for the `macOS` and `Windows` tabs below.

Author: Oops. Fixed in 7899861

The ROS 1 code
--------------

> Create a colcon workspace at ``~/ros2_talker_py``.

Reviewer 3: good eye 👍
